docs: add KB for Restore PVC stuck using Velero CSI plugin version < 0.4 (#639)
longhorn/website: content/kb/troubleshooting-restore-pvc-stuck-using-velero-csi-plugin-version-lower-than-0.4.md

---
title: "Troubleshooting: Restore PVC stuck using Velero CSI plugin version < 0.4"
author: Ray Chang
draft: false
date: 2022-12-15
categories:
  - "restore"
---

## Applicable versions

All Longhorn versions.

## Symptoms

PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) stuck in `Pending` state after restore with Velero < 0.4.

## Reason

When using Velero CSI plugin version < 0.4 to restore a PVC, only the GA storage-provisioner `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` in the annotation will be restored, but without the beta version `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner`. 

> Longhorn finds the beta version of storage-provisioner in annotation and provision the volume.

Reviewer: For Longhorn versions using `longhornio/csi-provisioner:v2.1.2`, when processing a PVC to provision the volume, Longhorn CSI provisioner will only recognize the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation which will be tagged to each PVC via Kubernetes after determining the storage provisioner. This annotation of the PVC will be backed up together via Velero.

After restoring the PVC via Velero with its CSI plugin (< 0.4), it will only remove the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` but keep the `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation intact of the PVC, because the plugin doesn't respect the general available `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation. Thus, it will cause the restoring PVC will be failed to be processed by the builtin Longhorn CSI provisioner and be stuck in the `Pending` state.

This compatibility issue is caused by the Velero CSI plugin and it has been fixed in the following versions, so since the 0.4 version, all annotations will be respected to ensure the corresponding volume provision is correct.

> When using Velero CSI plugin version < 0.4 to restore a PVC, only the GA storage-provisioner `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` in the annotation will be restored, but without the beta version `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner`. 
> 
> Longhorn finds the beta version of storage-provisioner in annotation and provision the volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Longhorn versions using `longhornio/csi-provisioner:v2.1.2`, when processing a PVC to provision the volume, Longhorn CSI provisioner will only recognize the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation which will be tagged to each PVC via Kubernetes after determining the storage provisioner. This annotation of the PVC will be backed up together via Velero.

After restoring the PVC via Velero with its CSI plugin (< 0.4), it will only remove the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` but keep the `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation intact of the PVC, because the plugin doesn't respect the general available `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation. Thus, it will cause the restoring PVC will be failed to be processed by the built-in Longhorn CSI provisioner and be stuck in the `Pending` state.

This compatibility issue is caused by the Velero CSI plugin and it has been fixed in the following versions, so since the 0.4 version, all annotations will be respected to ensure the corresponding volume provision is correct.
```

## Solution

> It is recommended to use Velero CSI plugin version >= 0.4 for backup and restore, it started supporting beta version storage-provisioner removed from annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to use the Velero CSI plugin version >= 0.4 for PVC backup and restore because it is compatible with different storage-provisioner annotations supported by different versions of CSI Provisioner. 
```

---
title: "Troubleshooting: Restoring PersistentVolumeClaim is stuck in the Pending state via Velero CSI Plugin < 0.4"
author: Ray Chang
draft: false
date: 2022-12-15
categories:
  - "restore"
---

## Applicable versions

All Longhorn versions.

## Symptoms

When using Velero with Velero CSI Plugin (< 0.4) to restore PersistentVolumeClaim manipulated by Longhorn, the PVC will be stuck in the `Pending` state.

## Reason

> For Longhorn versions using `longhornio/csi-provisioner:v2.1.2`, when it processes a PVC to provision the volume, Longhorn CSI provisioner will only recognize the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation which will be tagged to each PVC via Kubernetes after determining the storage provisioner. This annotation of the PVC will be backed up together via Velero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Longhorn versions using `longhornio/csi-provisioner:v2.1.2`, when it processes a PVC to provision the volume, Longhorn CSI provisioner will only recognize the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation which will be tagged together with `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` to each PVC via Kubernetes after determining the storage provisioner. The PVC with these annotations will be backed up together via Velero.
```

> After restoring the PVC via Velero with its CSI plugin (< 0.4), it will only remove the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` but keep the `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation intact from the PVC, because the plugin doesn't respect the general available `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation. Thus, it will cause the restoring PVC will be failed to be processed by the built-in Longhorn CSI provisioner and be stuck in the `Pending` state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After restoring the PVC via Velero with its CSI plugin (< 0.4), it will only remove the `volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` but keep the `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation intact from the PVC, because the plugin doesn't respect the general available `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` annotation. Because Kubernetes will not add `volume.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner` to the PVC which already has the beta annotation, it will cause the restoring PVC will be failed to be processed by the built-in Longhorn CSI provisioner and be stuck in the `Pending` state.
```

This compatibility issue is caused by the Velero CSI plugin and it has been fixed in the following versions, so since the 0.4 version, all annotations will be respected to ensure the corresponding volume provision is correct.

## Solution

It is recommended to use the Velero CSI plugin version >= 0.4 for PVC backup and restore because it is compatible with different storage-provisioner annotations supported by different versions of CSI Provisioner. 

## Related information

> * Related Longhorn comment: https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/4189#issuecomment-1192877753

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Related Longhorn comment: https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/4189#issuecomment-1192877753
* https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#volume-kubernetes-io-storage-provisioner
* https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#volume-beta-kubernetes-io-storage-provisioner-deprecated
```

---

> title: "Troubleshooting: Restoring PersistentVolumeClaim is stuck in the Pending state via Velero CSI Plugin < 0.4"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Troubleshooting: Velero restores Longhorn PersistentVolumeClaim stuck in the Pending state when using the Velero CSI Plugin version before v0.4.0"
```

author: Ray Chang
draft: false
date: 2022-12-15
categories:
  - "restore"
---

## Applicable versions

All Longhorn versions.

## Symptoms

> When using Velero with Velero CSI Plugin (< 0.4) to restore PersistentVolumeClaim manipulated by Longhorn, the PVC will be stuck in the `Pending` state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PersistentVolumeClaim is stuck in the `Pending` state when restoring Longhorn with Velero with Velero CSI Plugin version prior to v0.4.0.
```

Author: Thank you. I have updated the description as per the suggestion.
